146

CHAPTER FIVE Basic Computer Organization and Design

the operation is transferred to AC. The microoperations that execute this
instruction are:

Dj DR<—M[AR]
DjTss AC@ACADR, SCHO

The control function for this instruction uses the operation decoder D since
this output of the decoder isactive when the instruction has an AND operation
whose binary code value is 000. Two timing signals are needed to execute the
instruction. The clock transition associated with timing signal T, transfers the
operand from memory into DR. The clock transition associated with the next
timing signal T; transfers to AC the result of the AND logic operation between
the contents of DR and AC. The same clock transition clears SC to 0, transfer-
ring control to timing signal Ty to start a new instruction cycle.

ADD to AC

Thisinstruction adds the content of the memory word specified by the effective
address to the value of AC. The sum is transferred into AC and the output carry
Cou is transferred to the E (extended accumulator) flip-flop. The microopera-
tions needed to execute this instruction are

DT, DR < M[AR]
Dis AC — AC+DR, EC, SCH0

The same two timing signals, T, and Ts, are used again but with operation
decoder D, instead of Dy, which was used for the AND instruction. After the
instruction is fetched from memory and decoded, only one output of the
operation decoder will be active, and that output determines the sequence of
microoperations that the control follows during the execution of a memory-ref-
erence instruction.

LDA: Load to AC

This instruction transfers the memory word specified by the effective address
to AC. The microoperations needed to execute this instruction are

Dig DR < M[AR}
DjTs: AC — DR, SC-0

Looking back at the bus system shown in Fig. 5-4 we note that thereis no direct
path fromthe bus into AC. The adder and logic circuit receive information from
DR which can be transferred into AC. Therefore, it is necessary to read the
