196

‘iarreR Six Programming the Basic Computer

initialized, the program may run with incorrect data. The program itself is
straightforward and follows the steps listed in the flowchart. The comments
may help in following the step-by-step procedure.

This example has shown that if a computer does not have a machine
instruction for a required operation, the operation can be programmed by a
sequence of machine instructions. Thus we have demonstrated the software
implementation of the multiplication operation. The corresponding hardware
implementation is presented in Sec. 10-3.

Double-Precision Addition

When two 16-bit unsigned numbers are multiplied, the result is a 32-bit
product that must be stored in two memory words. A number stored in two
memory words is said to have double precision When a partial product is
computed, it is necessary that a double-precision number be added to the
shifted multiplicand, which is also a double-precision number. For greater
accuracy, the programmer may wish to employ double-precision numbers and
perform arithmetic with operands that occupy two memory words. We now
develop a program that adds two double-precision numbers.

(One of the double-precision numbers is placed in two consecutive mem-
ory locations, AL and AH, with AL holding the 16 low-order bits. The other
number is placed in BL and BH. The program is listed in Table 6-15. The two
low-order portions are added and the carry transferred into E. The AC is
cleared and the bit in E iscirculated into the least significant position of the AC.
The two high-order portions are then added to the carry and the double-
precision sum is stored in CL and CH.

 

TABLE 6-15 Program to Add Two Double Precision Numbers

LDAAL Load A low

ADD BL —/Add B low, carry in E

STACL Store in C low

CLA ‘lear AC

cL [Circulate to bring carry into AC(16)
ADD AH /Add A high and carry

ADD BH = /Add B high

STACH Store in C high

HLT

‘Location of operands

RPEPRP
