 

(278

 

 

GROUP 1 — THE ALKALI METALS

 

 

Moten sodum exienne Meter sod

 

 

 

or ee
,
F [oH Moen
weft setoie
i anode
- 1] anece -
i
1
11a gaze
nom ToT “

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 91 Downs cell for the production of sodium

‘A Downs cell comprises a cylindrical steel vesset lined with frebrick
measuring about 2.5m in height and 1 5m in diameter The anode 1 a
graphite rod m the middle and 1s surrounded by a cast steel cathode A
metal gauze screen separates the two electrodes and prevents the Na
formed at the cathode from recombining with Cl, produced at the anode
‘The molten sodium mses as st 1s less dense than the electrolyte, and
ie collected in an inverted trough and removed and packed ito steel
ddeurs

A simular cell can be used to obtain potassium by electolysing fused
KCI However. the cell must be operated at a higher temperature because
the melting point of KCl 1s higher. and this results in the vaponzation of|
the liberated potasstum Stnce sodium 1s a more powerful reducing agent
than potassium and 1s readily available, the modern method 1s to reduce
molten KCI with sodium vapour at 850°C in a large fractionating tower
‘This gives K of 99 5% purity

Na+ KCI NaCl + K

Rband Cs are produced ina similar way by redveing the chlorides wath Ca
131 750°C under reduced pressure

USES OF GROUP 1 METALS AND THEIR COMPOUNDS

Lithium stearate CisHiCOOLs 1s used in making automobile grease
LyCOs 1s added to bauxite 1n the electrolytic production of aluminum
asitoners the melting pomt L1,CO1 1s also used to toughen glass I aso
hhas uses in medicine, a8 ut affects the balance between Na* and K* and
Mg’* and Cat* im the body Lithium metal 1s used to make alloys for:
example wih fead 0 make white metal’ bearings for motor engines
‘with aluminium to make anreraft parts which are hight and strong, and!

 

 

with magnestum to make armout plate There 1s great snterest an ithrv|

 
