 

 

 

(+I) STATE

 

 

[71]

 

Halides

The halides FeF3, FeCl; and FeBr; can all be made by direct reaction of
halogen and metal. The iodide does not exist in a pure state because Fee*
oxidizes I~. In solution this oxidation is complete but some Fel; may exist
with Fel in the solid. Fe(+III) compounds are less ionized than those of
Fe(+II). FeF; is a white solid. It is sparingly soluble in water but the
solution does not give a positive test for Fe** or F~ ions. It combines with
alkali metal fluorides, forming complexes, e.g. Na3[FeF¢]. Fe?* has a d°
configuration. Since F~ is a weak field ligand, each of the d orbitals will be
singly occupied, giving a high-spin octahedral complex (Figure 24.5a). Asa
result of the small size of Fe**, Fe(+III) complexes are generally more
stable than those of Fe(+II).

Any d-d electronic transition breaks the Laporte selection rule. (This
states that Al/, the change in the secondary quantum number for the
transition, must be +1. For a d—d transition A/ = 0.) In [FeF,}~ the
electronic transition is ‘spin forbidden’ too, as it involves both promoting
an electron and reversing its spin. There is only a low probability of doing
this: hence the lack of colour. A similar effect is observed with Mn?*
spectra (see also Chapter 32).

In contrast to the absence of colour in FeF3, FeCl, solid is almost black.
It sublimes at about 300°C, giving a dimeric gas. FeBr3 is red—brown. The
colours arise from charge transfer spectra. The solid structures are layer
lattices, consisting of close-packed halide ions with Fe** occupying two
thirds of the octahedral holes in one layer, and none in the next layer.
FeCl, dissolves in both ether and water,.giving solvated monomeric species
(Figure 24.6). Iron(III) chloride is usually obtained as yellow-brown
lumps of the hydrate FeCl; - 6H O. This is very soluble in water and is used

both as an oxidizing agent, and as a mordant in dyeing. FeCl; is also used
in the manufacture of CCl,.

FeCl, catalyst 30°C
CS) + 3Ch > CCl + $,Ch

FeCl, lyst 60°C
C83 + 28,Ch OS, Ca, + 68

 

 

 

 

N

(a) weak ligand high spin

 

(b) strong ligand spin paired

Figure 24.5 d° electronic arrangement for Fe?+
